.\" Drawpile is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" Drawpile is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with Drawpile.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH DRAWPILE-SRV 1 "2014" "drawpile-srv" "DrawPile standalone serverr"
.
.SH NAME
drawpile-srv \- DrawPile server
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.B drawpile-srv
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
A standalone server for DrawPile.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
.TP
.BR --help , \ -h
show help text
.TP
.BR --version , \ -v
prints program version number
.TP
.BR --verbose , \ -V
print extra debugging information
.TP
.BR --port , \ -p\  port
listen on the specified port instead of the default.
.TP
.BR --listen , \ -l\  address 
bind to the specified address. If no listening address is specified,
drawpile-srv will listen on all addresses.
.TP
.BR --history-limit\  size
limit session history to given size (in megabytes.) Once size is exceeded,
the session history will be replaced with a snapshot of the current canvas
contents. Note: to avoid resetting the history too often, the size should be at
least bigger than the typical image when saved as a PNG image.
.TP
.BR --record , \ -r\  filename\ pattern
record sessions to files. Placeholders in the filename pattern will be expanded
to generate the actual filename. If a directory is given, a default filename pattern
will be used. The placeholders %d (date), %t (time) and %i (session ID) are supported.
.TP
.BR --host-password\  password
set the session hosting password. If set, this password must be entered to host a session.
.TP
.BR --sessions\  count
set session limit. This is the maximum number of sessions that can be active at the same time.
.TP
.BR --title , \ -t\  title
set server title. The title is shown in the session selector dialog. Linebreaks are supported and
URLs will be turned into clickable links.
.TP
.BR --persistent , \ -P
enable persistent sessions. Non-persistent sessions will be deleted immediately
when the last user leaves.
.TP
.BR --expire\  time
expire vacant sessions after the given time. Time can be given in seconds (3600),
minutes (60m), hours (1h) or days (0.04d)
.TP
.BR --ssl-cert\  cert.pem
select SSL certificate file.
.TP
.BR --ssl-key\  key.pem
select SSL private key file. This must be used together with
.B --ssl-cert
to enable SSL support.
.TP
.BR --secure , \ -S
strict security mode. When this flag is set, clients must use SSL to log in.
.TP
.BR --hibernation\  directory
enable session hibernation. Persistent sessions will be saved to the given directory when the
server is shut down. A hibernated session will be restored on demand when a user tries to join one.
.TP
.BR --hibernate-all
hibernate even non-persistent sessions on exit. A hibernated session behaves like a persistent session
until it is woken up again.
.TP
.BR --auto-hibernate
hibernate persistent sessions upon expiration instead of deleting them. Use together with
.B --expire
.TP
.BR --web-admin-port\  port
enable the web admin API. The HTTP server will listen on this port.
.TP
.BR --web-admin-app\  path
the directory to server under the path "/app/". This can be used to serve a browser admin interface.
.TP
.BR --web-admin-auth\  user:password
enable basic auth for the API using the given username and password
.TP
.BR --web-admin-access\  address/subnet
set access controls for the web admin interface. A subnet mask (e.g. 192.168.1.1/24) or the special value "all" can be used.
By default, access is only permitted from localhost.
.TP
.BR --userfile\  path
set the user credential file to use. If set, users listed in the file must authenticate to log in.
.TP
.BR --no-guests
all users must authenticate to log in. A userfile must have been set.
.TP
.BR --config , \ -c\  filename
load configuration file. All parameters can also be set in the configuration file.
Parameters set on the command line override those in the file.

.
.SH SOCKET ACTIVATION
.
Drawpile-srv supports systemd socket activation. When the server is started by systemd and a socket is passed, the parameters
--listen, --port and --web-admin-port are ignored. The listening address must be configured in drawpile-srv.socket unit file.
If two sockets are passed, the second one will be used for the web admin API.

.
.SH AUTHOR
.
Written by Calle Laakkonen <laakkonenc@gmail.com>.
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.
Copyright \(co 2013-2014 Calle Laakkonen <laakkonenc@gmail.com>
.br
This is Free Software; this software is licensed under the GPL version 3, as published by the Free Software Foundation.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
